---
title: 'What is Tailwind CSS doing here?'
description: 'We are using Tailwinds "engine" to generate utility classes on demand, based on our design tokens. '
date: 2023-11-30
---

**Update February 2024:**
The CSS system of this starter was invented by Andy Bell.
I wrote the following explanation quite quickly after hearing several times that people are confused about normal Tailwind CSS classes not working. In the meantime, Andy has published a [much better and much more detailed explanation](https://piccalil.li/blog/a-css-project-boilerplate/).

---

We are using Tailwinds "engine" to generate utility classes on demand, based on our design tokens.

If you have a look at the [tailwind.config.js](https://github.com/madrilene/eleventy-excellent/blob/main/tailwind.config.js), you can see how that is done. For example, we are [deactivating Tailwinds default reset](https://github.com/madrilene/eleventy-excellent/blob/main/tailwind.config.js#L67C1-L69C5).

We are hooking into the components layer, to make Tailwind output classes based on our tokens, instead of their default design system.

That is, you are able to use `mt-xs-s` instead of a class like `mt-20` for example. Same goes for colors, depending on the names you defined in your `colors.json`, you get custom classes like `text-primary`. These use the usual Tailwind prefixes.

**Example:**

```js
{
	"name": "my custom color name",
	"value": "pink"
},
```

You get a custom property mapped to the color name `pink`: `--color-my-custom-color-name: pink` _and_ the classes `bg-my-custom-color-name` as well as `text-my-custom-color-name`.

Consider that we limit those utilities in the theme section:

```js
backgroundColor: ({theme}) => theme('colors'),
textColor: ({theme}) => theme('colors'),
margin: ({theme}) => ({
	auto: 'auto',
	...theme('spacing')
}),
padding: ({theme}) => theme('spacing')
```

If you want to add the generation for border-color classes for example, you'd have to add that right there:

`borderColor: ({theme}) => theme('colors')`

Also. you _do_ have something like `md:text-right` available because we define the screens on line 26:

```js
screens: {
      md: '50em',
      lg: '80em'
    },`
```

Additionally, you get custom properties based on the naming of your design token files, the prefix is defined in line 77:

```js
const groups = [
  {key: 'colors', prefix: 'color'},
  {key: 'spacing', prefix: 'space'},
  {key: 'fontSize', prefix: 'size'},
  {key: 'fontFamily', prefix: 'font'}
];
```

In your dev tools you can see all the generated custom properties + your custom ones from `css/global/variables.css`.
They are generated by default.

{% eleventyImage "./src/assets/images/blog/custom-properties.png", "Screenshot of the Firefox dev tools, CSS tab, showing the generated custom properties" %}

You can also create custom utility classes on line 104:

```js
const customUtilities = [
  {key: 'spacing', prefix: 'flow-space', property: '--flow-space'},
  {key: 'colors', prefix: 'spot-color', property: '--spot-color'}
];
```

For example: `{key: 'spacing', prefix: 'gutter', property: '--gutter'}`

If you install the Tailwind CSS IntelliSense addon, you can actually see the classes available to you, including the color preview.

{% eleventyImage "./src/assets/images/blog/intellisense.png", "Screenshot in VS Code showing the available flow-space-classes we created, using the Tailwind CSS IntelliSense addon" %}

Read some thoughts that lead Andy Bell to come up with that approach: https://andy-bell.co.uk/i-used-tailwind-for-the-u-in-cube-css-and-i-liked-it/
